Older people are major users of acute health care. Some older people are at a higher risk of poor outcomes due to frailty. Addressing frailty remains a high priority for Healthcare systems which continue to develop services and interventions that identify and support  frail patients in order to maintain their functionality and independence thereby slowing or avoiding deterioration that often results in the need for hospital care. 

The model identifies admissions that may be related to frailty by adapting an approach developed by  Gilbert, Thomas et al. "Development and validation of a Hospital Frailty Risk Score focusing on older people in acute care settings using electronic hospital records: an observational study." (see Lancet (London, England) vol. 391,10132 (2018): 1775-1782. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30668-8).

The model identifies all emergency admissions for patients aged over 75 and generates a total frailty score for each spell based on  diagnoses recorded for admissions during the previous 2 years. Frailty scores for each prior admission are  assigned a score  taken a table of ICD10 risk scores within the paper above. For example a patient with 2 previous admissions where the first had a recorded diagnosis of F00 Dementia and the second had a diagnosis of W19 unspecified fall is awarded a score of 7.1 for the first admission and 3.2 for the second giving a total frailty score of 10.3.

Spells are categorised as either intermediate frailty risk (total score > 5) or high intermediate risk (total score > 15).